
2

Automatic Zoom
Facilitator’s Guide: 
Script, talking points, takeaways, and setup considerations inside.
An Introduction to Design Thinking“Wallet” Edition
A little background on the project
The project you’re holding in your hands is an iteration on the d.school’s iconic “Wallet Project.” The original wallet project was created as an introduction to design thinking for the d.school’s inaugural Boot Camp class in the Winter of 2006.  It has since been contributed to, modified, stretched, and evolved by many d.school collaborators. The Wallet Project is an immersive activity meant to give participants a full cycle through the design thinking process in as short a time as possible.  The project itself gives facilitators the opportunity to touch on the fundamental values of the d.school—human-centered design, a bias towards action, and a culture of iteration and rapid prototyping—without attempting to communicate all of the methods and activities that the term “design thinking” encompasses.Why did we choose a wallet as the starting point for the introductory design challenge?    * everyone has experience with a wallet, or another way to carry cash, cards, and ID    * the wallet and its contents have the potential to evoke a range of meaning and the larger context of a person’s life    * wallet as a starting point enables a wide range of potential innovation outcomes (we’ve seen objects, experiences, services, systems, and spaces!)    * having a physical artifact in-hand allows for immediate recall of experiences (participants can gain empathy for one another in the room)It is certainly possible to facilitate a similar project with a different topic—and you may choose to in order to amp up a particular aspect you think is important for your group of participants.  For example, we have done the “oral-hygiene project” to make it more personal and had partipants observe their partners in their homes previous to the beginning of the workshop.  We also do a “redesign the gift-giving experience” version, with the aim to encourage participants to create services, experiences, and systems.  If you decide to change the topic [you can simply change the instructions for the first two steps], be mindful of the considerations we listed above and scope it in a way that is both wide-open to possibilities but also managable for participants.
Why project-based, team-facilitated learning?
Having created learning experiences for students of all cultures, ages, disciplines, and industries, we have found that engaging in projects provides a much richer learning experience than listening to a “talking head” does. As such, our bias is to provide limited scaffolding to allow participants to do, and then to facilitate a reflection that invites the participants themselves to extract the meaningful learning opportunities from the experience.  We teach in teams at the d.school because we have found that this approach tends to create a conversation in the classroom, as opposed to the one-way communication that often transpires in more lecture-driven formats.  We relish the diversity of perspectives that emerge when faculty from diverse backgrounds instruct, and even disagree in front of, a class.  One great way to run the Wallet Project with two people, is for one to take lead (concentrating on communicating the instructions, logistics, and timing), and the other person to provide color (communicating the nuances, offering encouragement, and providing helpful tips).
The Wallet Project
Set up the room so that participants are in an active posture (sitting upright, standing), with access to a horizontal space for note taking.
Space should be configured to allow for participants to pair up near one another easily. Cocktail style—small, standing height—tables are nice to have.Play upbeat music during all steps while participants work, and turn it down to give instruction.Make sure you have supplies on hand for prototyping (we recommend paper, pens, popsicle sticks, pipe cleaners, scissors, duct tape, and the like).Print the participant worksheet on single-sided 11x17 paper.Print the facilitator’s guide on double-sided 11x17 paper.Find a fun way to announce “Time’s up!” (we use a gong at the d.school).  Be assertive about keeping the timing tight.If possible, have a TEAM of coaches who are familiar with the project share the responsibility for facilitating the learning experience.The kick-off:“Instead of just telling you about design thinking,we want to immediately have you jump right in and experience it for yourself.We are going to do a design project for about the next hour.Ready? Let’s go!”
How to set up and kickoff the project
Sketch your idea here! 
3min
Design the IDEAL wallet.Draw
d. 
Design the IDEAL wallet.
Draw
This is what we call the “false-start”.Of course, you don’t tell participants it is a false-start.The intention is to contrast an abstract problem-centric approach (that may be typical for many people) to a human-centered design thinking approach which participants will experience in the rest of the project.Don’t play music during this step, to accentuate the difference between the false-start and the main part of the exercise.“OK, let’s jump right in.”“This is going to feel rushed; that’s okay.  Roll up your sleeves and get ready to lean into the project.”“Come up with some ideas for the ‘ideal’ wallet.”“Go ahead and draw an idea for a better wallet.”Let them know how much time they will have.It is normal for people to feel stuck and delay putting anything down on paper.Reminding them of the time they have left can push them to start.. . . At the end of the step:“How did that feel?  My guess is, ‘Not great.’”“That was a typical problem-solving approach, taking on a given problem, working using your own opinions and experience to guide you, and with a solution in mind to be designed.”“Let’s try something else—a human-centered design thinking approach.”
How to facilitate this step
                        Design something useful and meaningful for your partner.Start by gaining empathy.
Switch roles & repeat Interview Switch roles & repeat Interview 
Notes from your first interview Notes from your second interview
8min (2 sessions x 4 minutes each)
Interview1
d. 
2 6min (2 sessions x 3 minutes each)
Your NEW mission: Dig Deeper
6min (2 sessions x 3 minutes each)
Start by gaining empathy.
1—Interview your Partner
Have participants partner up in pairs.It helps to refer to “Partner A” and “Partner B” to simplify your language in these interactive steps. “Your challenge is to design something useful and meaningful to your partner.” “The most important part of designing for someone is to gain empathy for that person.”“One way to do this is to have a good conversation.”Be clear about the logistics of the interviews:“Partner A will have four minutes to interview Partner B, and then we will tell you when to switch.”“As a starting point, ask your partner to walk you through the contents of their wallet.”“When do they carry their wallet?  Why do they have a particular card in there?  What do the things in their wallet tell you about their life?”Tell them to take note of things they find interesting or surprising.“Let’s begin!” (Don’t forget to start playing the upbeat music now.)
2—Dig deeper
After the first set of interviews, tell them to follow up on things that intrigued them during the first interview.“Try to dig for stories, feelings, and emotion.”“Ask ‘WHY?’ often”“Forget about the wallet, find out what’s important to your partner.”“Why does he still carry a picture of his ex-girlfriend?  When was a time he carried a lot of cash?  What does she remember most about her first paying job?”Remind them you will let them know when time is up.. . .“Time to switch!  Again, make note of any unexpected discoveries along the way, capture quotes!”
How to facilitate these stepsPROTOTYPETESTIDEATEDEFINE EMPATHIZE
